Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lob. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Gail Dines. She is Professor Emerita
of Sociology and women's studies at Willock College. She
specializes in the study of pornography and she's also
the ceo of culture, reframed and nonprofit built to
build resilience and resistance in kids to pornography and
hyper sexualized media. And today we're focusing mostly on
her book Porn Land. How porn has hijacked our
sexuality. So, Doctor Dimes, welcome to the show. It's
a pleasure to everyone.
It's a pleasure. Yes.
Ok. So let me start by asking you, is
there any particular definition of pornography? Would you define
pornography in any specific way or is that, or
is it one of those things that we know
when we see it or we can identify it
when we see it? But it's really hard to
define.
No, it's not. First of all. Um, CONSIDERING you've
got a multibillion dollar industry called pornography, if they
produce por pornography, which is what they're out for,
then I'm happy to go with their definition. It's
like when you're discussing any other industry, like fast
food, you're not asked to define it. You look
at the industry and you see what the product
is. Um But as we get talking, we will
talk about how at the core of pornography is
the debasement and dehumanization of women. That's what makes
porn porn. So, um I don't really get into
definitional issues because it doesn't make any sense. You
wouldn't get into that for any other industry. Um,
BECAUSE, you know, the, uh, car industry, as I
said, makes cars you don't talk about, it has
an engine and a steering wheel and this, you
know, you look at the industry and you see
what they produce,
right? Uh Could you tell us a little bit
about the history of pornography, particularly in the US?
Because there are bits that might be very interesting
here for us to explore, particularly how it's changed
over the course of the last few decades, particularly
with the introduction of the internet and all of
the different kinds of media we have nowadays.
So I would say that if you want to
look at the modern day pornography industry, you have
to start with Playboy. And the reason for that
is that Playboy really mainstreamed pornography. It took it
out of the back streets and CD corners and
put it on the coffee tables of often middle
class white men. Um, NOW what was interesting about
that was, this was a very conservative time during
the fifties in the US. And so the question
is how did a man, New Hefner manage to
build an empire on pornography in what was a
conservative time? And one of the things he did
that was very clever was he really built a
magazine that spoke to the aspi of the up
and coming white middle class man who had for
the first time, really disposable income. And so you
had this new sort of middle class and remember
a lot of them were born during the depression
and the war and they were very frugal and
I know it sounds ridiculous, but they didn't know
how to spend money at that point because you
saved money. So what he really produced was a
magazine that was based upon, um teaching these men
what consumption looked like. You'd have whole articles on
what clothes to wear, um what uh desk to
buy, what to eat. And of course, what really
attracted these men was the centerfolds and the images,
you know, he said, um people said I excuse
me, um I only read pornography for the articles.
Well, that's ridiculous. You know, I felt like writing
to them once into pornography and saying, you know,
no one's looking at the pictures. Of course, it
was the pictures that really made it popular. But
he did it in a way that was sort
of um surrounded by a middle class lifestyle. They
had very um well known writers in there. And
they once said that if they took um the
pictures out of Playboy. Playboy would die like a
dead dog. And I would say if you took
the articles out of Playboy, it would die because
you wouldn't have a cover, you know, you needed
a cover to say why did you have these
images of women on, you know, out there in
the public? So he sort of really introduced soft
core, made it mainstream. Then in the sixties, Penthouse
came in and the goal was for Penthouse Bob
Guccione, who'd been in it, publishing in England was
to come to the US and to really make
it um sort of really make Penthouse the number
one pornography magazine. However, there was a war between
Playboy and Penthouse of who could produce the most
explicit images. And in the end, Penthouse really lost
the war and the reason is their images were
too explicit for advertisers. Cos remember this is how
you make money in the media. So in those
days, um so what he did was um not
only did he um sexualize, not only did he
can modify sexuality. This is Hugh Hefner, he sexualized
commodities and said if you consume at the level
that we tell you to in Playboy, then you
can get these women who are centerfolds and all
the other images. So he actually understood not to
cross a line. So the because the advertisers with
them and they did start, by the way, at
some point when there was a battle between Playboy
and Penthouse to pull some of the advertisements cos
the images were too explicit in the end. Um
Playboy one because they stopped producing such explicit images
as penthouse and Penthouse never really found its feet.
But watching this from the sidelines was a strip
club owner from Ohio called Larry Flint. And he
came in in the seventies with Hustler and he
became the sort of he established the hardcore end
of pornography. So you had Playboy Penthouse and Hustler
and what they did three, these three men is
they socialized and groomed the American public to accept
more pornography as a kind of mainstream image. So
that really went on for many years. Then you
had uh videos um et cetera. But what really
sort of made Playboy, the sex education of the
present day and the wallpaper of young people's lives
was the internet. And when the internet became domesticated
in 2000, it made pornography. What one scholar has
called affordable Anonymous and accessible. You didn't have to
leave the home, you didn't have to go into
these theaters. You didn't have to go to the
local uh porn CD shop. So really what happened
is the internet and it, it, the internet allowed
to build pornography. But I also want to say
that the pornography helped construct the internet. Pornography is
always at the head of technology. It's where a
lot of R and D money comes from. And
So a lot of the things like you see,
like pop ups, pop downs paywalls, all of these
things was actually introduced by the porn industry. So
that's what got us to 2000. And what was
interesting is someone who was watching what was going
on was, um, I was pretty astounded by the
degree to which the pornography on the internet became
hardcore so quickly. I mean, it literally went from,
you know, semi soft core to semi hardcore to
absolute hardcore, which is in porn land, I call
gonzo. But I wrote porn land in 2008, 2009.
And that's what the industry was calling it. It's
no longer called Gonzo because mainstream porn is hardcore,
it's very, very hard to find anything on the
internet, especially for free. That's not hardcore. So, um
in the beginning between about 4007, anyone with a
camcorder could get a set of porn site going
make money. And then in 2007, a man called
Baby and Simon who was an it specialist came
in and he developed the p the free porn
tube sites and very much like youtube. And that's
what really, that's when Paul really took off, he
didn't need a, a credit card, most of the
stuff was free and it was hardcore. So if
you think about um your average kid or young
male going to pornography, they're gonna go to a
site that's free and accessible. They're not gonna start
hunting through the millions of sites to find soft
core. So, again, um, porn hub Fabian Thon, who
was the head of mind geek, that's the company
that he founded. Um, JUST saturated the internet with
hardcore porn. And I mean, I was, I think
all of us who researched pornography from a critical
stance were shocked by the degree to which it
became so hardcore so quickly. And in fact, if
you would have told me what, 30 odd years
ago that you would have hardcore pornography up there
accessible to anybody for free, I would have said
no, that's not gonna happen. You know, the culture's
not gonna sit back. Politicians aren't gonna sit back
and let that happen. But I would have been
wrong.
So please correct me if I'm wrong. But if
I understand it correctly and the way you presented
how pornography changed over the course of the past
few decades, particularly in the US. But now worldwide,
the two main, the two main changes that occur
and probably the ones that worry you the most
have to do with the fact that over time,
at least in your understanding, it became increasingly hard
core and it's also more easily available and even
more so for Children and adolescents
and mainstream, it's now become the wallpaper of their
lives. It's the mainstream. Not only, you know, if
it was hardcore, only a few people watched it
few men because mainly men who were consumers, um,
it would be a problem but not to the
degree that it is that it's so mainstreamed in
our lives that it's a lot of kids actually
see it as just another social media site, not
even pornography.
And what do you mean by phrases, words or
terms? Like women being demeaned and debased in hardcore
pornography? What does that mean? Exactly. And I want
to ask you that because there are people out
there that when they hear this kinds of words,
they might uh reply with, with something like or
something along the lines of, oh you're just moralizing
things.
This is not a moral issue, right? I am
progressive. Um LEFT wing, I mean on the left.
So this is not about a moral issue. This
is about a harms issue. And um the issue
really becomes um what happens in a culture where
those images themselves become the blueprint for all other
forms of media. What happens there? So, and if
you look at porn hub, you porn, ex porn,
um you will see that the acts are based
on cruelty and body punishing acts where she's um
can I speak freely about what's in pornography? Um
You see a lot of gagging where the woman
is gagged with a penis so far down her
throat that she can't breathe. And as she's choking,
the male porn performer is actually grabbing her head
and pulling it closer so she chokes even more.
I've seen scenes where she even vomits and they
keep those in uh something that's become very worrisome
and very popular lately. Strangulation. Um And that we're
finding from studies, there was a recent study that's
asked uh incoming young women into college. When was
about their last sexual experience, not their entire sexual
experience. The last and one in three was strangled.
They said now, where does this come from? And
remember this can be fatal because you're cutting off
the air to the brain, which can cause all
sorts of brain damage. Even if you don't kill
it, you can cause a lot of problems. Um
STROKE, um heart attacks, things like this. So you've
got a lot of strangulation. Um A lot of
very hardcore anal sex where the goal is to
make it hurt to make it really be something
that you can't tolerate. And um if you sometimes
go on the poor discussion boards, you'll get questions
like um can a thread like can someone point
me to a porn movie where the bitch can
no longer stand it and then you'll get hundreds
of responses on these ball on these sites saying
go to this movie at three minutes, 23 seconds
and you see a breakdown. So the more cruel
it is, the more it's drawing on more it
draws consumers. So it's really based on that. Um
There's a lot of spitting in her face, especially
ejaculation. On the face. I mean, anything from 1
to 34 men are ejaculating on her face. And
um in a documentary called um in the documentary,
they, they actually interviewed a pornographer and he said
they asked him, why do they actually um ejaculate
on a woman's face. And he said it's like
a dog pissing on a lamppost, it's claiming your
own territory. So, I mean, your average porn movie
is anything 12345 guys um basically penetrating a woman
orally, anally, vaginally, sometimes two penises in the mouth,
two in the anus two in the vagina, which
just imagine what that does to the body cos
this is a real human being and she has
bodily limits and what you see is they take
her to the extreme and it is that extreme
that has become mainstream and that is basically what
has made pornography so popular.
So about that, let me just ask you one
thing you mentioned a lot of extreme acts there.
But uh what if at least some of them,
I'm not saying all of them, but if some
of them are done uh consensually because of course,
for most people, there is something that they wouldn't
engage in sexual because they consider it to be
extreme. But there are uh a tiny number of
people like people, for example, who practice B DS
M that are into those kinds of acts,
which is linked to pornography by the way, you
can't take B DS M away from pornography. Pornography
is also mainstream B DS M, it doesn't mean
it invented it, but it mainstreamed. Look, the question
is you can never know if it's consensual. That's
the first thing. Um, WE don't know because we
don't know what contracts they sign the women and
we don't know under what conditions, what we do
know is pornography is where sexism, racism, capitalism and
colonialism intersect for the women because most of the
women in pornography are poor and desperate. So you
don't get um the average graduate from Harvard or
Yale or Princeton or whatever, lining up to do
pornography. It's mainly poor women from poor countries. So
anything where there's coercion, it can be economic coercion,
it can be coercion through a pimp, it can
be coercion through being um a um refugee from
wars. Um So we don't know and also the
sites don't check the sites, don't check. They say
they look at the um uh contracts but you,
you don't know under what conditions. So my assumption
is that unless that there's so few women who
really consent and when you consent, you have to
have other options in life. Pornography can't be the
only way to put food on the table. So
I would say given what we know about the
women in pornography, they've also, by the way, are
disproportionately victims of child sexual abuse prior to being
in pornography. When you know those conditions, then you
have to say basically that consent is more complicated
than what they're saying.
And aren't there particular cases? I'm not sure what
percentage of cases this would correspond to, but aren't
there cases of child pornography as well or pornography
than with underage people.
Porn hub is full of it. They're being sued
right now. This case is going forward. Um, AND
I mean, and I spend quite a bit of
time on porn hub. So I mean, I've seen
very ill looking girls. I mean, um they barely
look pubescent. So yes, it's sort of full of
those images as well and it's full of trafficked
women as well, women who've been trafficked into the
porn industry by the pimps. So, um the industry
is built on, as I said, racism, sexism, colonialism
cap, you know, capitalism all and the more you
fall into those categories, the more likely you are
to be exploited. So any industry that's built on
the, on the economic exploitation is suspect to begin
with. And that's true of all industries, but especially
the porn industry where the actual acts of violence
against her are so body punishing and cruel and
also cause post traumatic stress disorder. Um ALL sorts
of bodily injuries, um especially uh anal prolapses where
the anuses drop out through hardcore anal sex. Um
CHLAMYDIA of the eye gonorrhea of throat. I mean,
these are the, you don't hear other people apart
from prostituted women having those kinds of, um, on
the job, uh, diseases or, you know, their body
being treated in such a way. I mean, I
remember once, um, when I was having some blood
drawn, it had a big sign up. If you
come into contact with bodily fluids, this was in
a, uh, healthcare facility, call this number immediately. And
as I sat there, I thought, could you imagine
if the porn industry had to abide by that,
they'd be on the phone all the time? I
mean, think of all the bodily fluids that are
all over the porn, set urine, blood feces, saliva,
um ejaculate. I might just think it's what's actually
there and, you know, we're meant to have where's
OSHA, which is the actual in America responsible for
health and safety in the workplace? Nobody seems to
care about pornography. And I would say it's because
it's mainly women who are victims.
But, but when it comes to ST I specifically,
I hear lots of um more, I hear lots
of times that in nowadays, particularly the big companies,
they require their actors to do blood work every
15 days or something like that.
I got in a lot of it actually. Um
AND I uh and this is straight from the
porn industry, I can't say who it is, but
I was um in conversation with one of the
people who actually do those tests and he said
a lot of them change their tests because they
want to work and they change their test if
they're HIV positive or they've got some sort of
disease. Um, AND again, where, where there's so many,
hundreds of thousands of women in the porn industry
and from all over the world, remember we're not
talking now just about L A and the Valley
we're talking about all over the world. How are
you gonna check all those women? How are you
going to keep, you know, any documentation about that?
So that's a bit, that's a myth.
And, and what do you make of uh porn
that is labeled as feminist? Like, for example, there's
a director slash producer from Sweden called Erika Lust
and she creates porn that she labels as feminist
that is more targeted toward the female audience and
depict sex in more, I don't know, a romantic
and emotionally involved ways.
That's not, I mean, I've seen a lot of
work and um her stuff looks a lot like
mainstream hardcore pornography. Well, Erika Lust is, is an
excellent businesswoman. Uh SHE has created as has some
of those other so called feminist pornographers, a great
niche market. And what you find is more woke
men will go there because they don't want to
think they're actually supporting the mainstream porn industry. So,
I mean, and if pornography works by virtue of
de degradation and debasement of women, you know, the
first rule of feminism is do no harm to
women. So I don't see that as feminist pornography,
I see it as a niche market of the
mainstream porn industry.
And of course, in your work, you talk a
lot about some of the supposed psychological effects of
porn. So what are the main ones you would
point to? And what is the evidence to support?
Well, it's not just my work. We're talking now
about 30 to 40 years of empirical research by
psychologists, sociologists and multiple disciplines coming together. And what
they found for boys and men is that the
more pornography they watch, the more they have anxiety
depression, the more likely they are to act out
the violence that they see, the more likely their
sexual scripts are going to be formed by pornography,
the more likely their sexual templates are going to
be formed by pornography. The less likely they are
to have empathy for uh rape victims. Um They
often, if they get into habitual use, they withdraw
from life completely and become totally addicted to their
pornography. Now that's a smaller percentage. I want to
be clear, but it is growing where every time
we speak a culturally frame and we go out
and give lectures and talk about it. We hear
from front line medical experts about the degree to
which pornography is now becoming a problem even with
kids in terms of addiction and it's a substance
unlike other forms of addictive substances, you can't really
detox from this because the images are in your
head, you formed your sexual template around this, it
what arouses you. And also one of the things
we found is that men who are deep into
pornography actually prefer pornography over actual sex with real
human beings because, you know, pornography is so hardcore
that so many, so few women will do those
acts that in fact asking a male whose sexual
template or script has been formed by pornography to
go and have actual sex is like asking a
whiskey drinker to go back to beer. It's boring.
They get very desensitized to the violence. So they're
looking for more and more images of violence.
So at a certain point there, you mentioned porn
addiction. So le let me just ask you because
I have on the show, a neuroscientist who does
work on porn, Doctor Nicole Prosi. And uh and
one of the things that we talked about is
exactly porn addiction. And she told me that according
to her study and the studies of other people,
people who tend to report that they suffer from
porn addiction, the most tend to be religious. People
who have been brought up with moral values against
pornography use. What do you make of that?
I'd say that her studies are against the grain
of the weight of the studies about addiction, right?
I mean, when you're in any science, you don't
go by one study or two studies, you go
by the weight of the evidence and Nicole Price's
work constantly stands outside the weight of the evidence.
So I don't really carry, I don't feel they
carry much weight given the enormity of the evidence
that doesn't show that to be true, that in
fact, becoming addicted to porn is much more likely
to be for, um, men who are on the,
um, spectrum for, uh, people who've gone through the
foster care system. People with men with H DH
D A DH D, I mean, there's other factors
that make you more susceptible to becoming um an
addict religion has not been found to be one
of them.
OK. So uh do you also make claims about
uh uh relationship between pornography consumption and increase in
sexual aggression or sexual violence?
Well, not, I do, but I draw it from
the research of course, and what we found in
longitudinal studies which remember that's causation and not correlation
is that um boys who excuse me and men
who watch pornography are more likely to act out
the violent acts. Yes, that's what the research is
showing. And again, we have an enormous amount of
research to show this. It's not gay down saying
this, right? It's looking at what the research says,
but about that. Isn't it also true that over
time, I mean, over the course of the decades,
foreign conception has been increasing. But at the same
time, if you look at sexual violence, it has
been decreasing. And so at least just looking at
those two factors, it seems that there would be
a negative correlation between porn, conception and sexual.
That's a cathartic effect that if you watch poor,
you won't go out and do violence again. There's
no research to show that. In fact, if I
don't, the statistics do not suggest that violence against
women is decreasing. What we do know is less
women are reporting when we speak again, we work
a lot in the medical world and when you
listen to those who are on the front lines,
most of the women who have been violated, raped,
hurt in some way, do not report it because
they can't go, they feel that they're going to
get, um, degraded yet again through the uh justice
system. So, um, no, I mean, it again, that
study one in three girls had been strangled in
their last sexual and young women had been strangled
in their last sexual um, experience that wouldn't get
noted down as violence. So there's all types of
violence now that are not noted down. So, I
mean, this is what makes really drawing sort of,
um assumptions about this very difficult is that there's
new types of violence which are not being defined
as violence by the women who and girls who
themselves are being groomed by the porn industry to
expect this. Uh
There's also another thing that came to my mind
now a few years ago, I read on the
news that, uh, but I I think it was
in the UK, there was an increase recently of,
uh, women asked to perform anal sex by their
partners. And I think that it was probably influenced
also by pornography in that specific case. Of course,
I'm not saying that that's necessarily a case of
violence, but the case of changing expectations when it
comes to sex.
Exactly. It is changing expectations of what it is
to do. And also, um, we know a lot
of women report men doing anal sex on them
without asking and being hurt by this. Um, AGAIN,
the medical profession talk about a lot of anal
ruptures, a lot of, um, harm done to women
anally. And you think about it, you know, again,
porn didn't invent anal sex. What it did is
it may, is it basically normalized it to the
point that many men do expect ailes as do
women because they too, you know, have been influenced
by the porn industry.
Yes. And in that specific case, the expectations written,
it's not just that men expect, expect anal sex
to be more available, but also women, uh, have
the expectation that they, they have to perform anal
sex to please their partner plus
everything else. You see, and what we found, there's
not many studies done on how women respond to
pornography, but there's a few and what they find
is that, um, a lot of women go to
pornography not to masturbate, but to see what men
want of them so that they can then perform
that and actually scaring them, it scares them to
see those and it would be scary. I mean,
I think for myself when I was younger, if
I would have seen that, I mean, who wants
to have sex after that when you're watching it?
But they, um, do perform this because they think
it is expected of them and that, this is
what they should be doing.
Mhm So let me also ask you because earlier,
you described some of the most extreme acts that
we can see in
those were mainstream, those were not, I don't go
into extreme areas now.
O OK. OK. Um OK. So the, the extreme
acts that we see in mainstream porn. But what
about the kinds of stories that we usually see
presented in porn movies? Do you think that that's
also important to explore? There's
no, there's very few porn movies that have stories
to them. Most of them are just clips of
sex act after violent sex act after violent sex
act. The days of, you know, the, I don't
know the piece of delivery man coming to the
door and then they end up having sex. Those
those belong in the 19 nineties and earlier they
know not there. Now most of it does not
have a storyline. It's just sex scene after sex
scene after sex scene.
And uh I mean, many times when I hear
you and other people who have the same approach
to pornography. Talk about pornography. You use words like
sexual exploitation. What does exploitation mean in this particular
context?
Well, it means taking a human being to modifying
them, um destroying the fact their humanity, selling them
out, making them disposable, uh putting them through all
kinds of violence, both physically and mental and it's
the loss of power over that person. That's what
exploitation is, is when that person loses power and
people come in and either exploit them when they've
lost power through poverty or whatever, or groom them
into becoming uh se um performers in the sex
industry. And the sex industry is a revolving door.
You know, you go to pornography, you go to
strip clubs, you end up being prostituted, you go
to brothels very much. The same women are going
through this revolving door.
Mhm. And so those are the different kinds of
ways. And I would imagine that you would also
add things like sex trafficking, the different kinds of
ways that women in the porn industry can be
exploited
the whole sex industry, right? And that includes only
fans where women are being sexually exploited in onlyfans.
I mean, often the media talk about, you know,
this woman became a millionaire through only fans and
you get those stories. Those are very, very rare.
The average woman on onlyfans makes about 100 and
$80 a month, which is not enough to put
food on the table. A lot of them are
pimped into it again. A lot of them have
the same background as women in um pornography wanting
to make money cos they can't make it in
other ways. So I'm talking about the entire sex
industry is an exploitation of what it means to
be human. And these women are systematically dehumanized in
the sex industry. And in fact, it's not an
accident because the more you dehumanize her, the more
you destroy her sense of self, the more likely
she is to be a com compliant. And that's
taken as misunderstood as consent.
It's interesting that you mentioned platforms like only fans
because I was actually going to ask you because
I had this idea that at least in those
sorts of platforms since it is uh I mean,
the users, the creators that create their own content
and put it out there that it would be
more independently done. And so some of the issues
that perhaps we see in the p industry, we
wouldn't see there.
Well, first, we don't know how independently done it
is if these are not women who have pimps
who are putting them on onlyfans. And secondly, you
know, Onlyfans takes 20% of the woman's earnings. So
Onlyfans is actually a pimp site. It pimps out
women and this pimp site is very interesting because
so few women make much money, they offer that
if you bring in your friends to only fans,
you get a percentage of what she makes. So
you're taking women, you're pimping them out and then
you're asking them to become pimps by bringing in
other women. So it's a real, you know, sort
of, kind of pimp um platform uh that really
is becoming more encased in the porn industry. And
one of the reasons for that is that there's
a lot of money to be made for the
platforms and that some of the men are desensitized
to pornography and want what they think is a
girlfriend experience or some kind of interaction with a
real human being. But of course, it's all about
commodification of the human being and of the woman
and commodification of sex.
And what do you make of uh women? I'm
focusing mostly on women here. We can also talk
about the men of course, but women who work
in the parliament industry and say or claim that
they like it, they want to do it and
even when it comes to the more extreme scenes,
they, they're doing it consensually, what do you make
of that?
Well, first of all, there might be a few
women like that. I wouldn't say no. But remember
these women work in the industry, right? You're not
going to say I'm exploited. I hate it. This
is terrible because you're never going to work in
the industry again. So don't ask a woman who's
in the industry to talk about what's going on
it's like asking someone at a, you know, sweatshop
how they feel about their job with their manager
standing next to them. You're not gonna get the
truth. And also psychologically, if she's in the industry,
she's really going to have to psychologically believe that
because otherwise she would absolutely crash and burn. Having
to do the violence done, having to experience that
violence on a daily basis is just too much
to admit what's happening to your body. And we
work and have spoken to a lot of women
who've been out of the industry for many years
and they say the same thing when I was
in it, I would have said the same thing.
It's only now I'm out of it and that
I can sort of process what's happened to me
that I now realize what was going on.
So do you think that perhaps to a certain
extent they would be rationalizing things as a sort
of defense mechanism?
Yes. Partly and partly because if you want to
work in the industry, that's the story you have
to give. Mhm. But I mean,
uh no, I was just going to say that
actually some of those cases of people who only
after they abandoned the foreign industry that they come
out and tell about how they were exploited or
are they felt exploited? There are people out there,
like for example, when the Rhodes Mia Khali that
now talk about their experiences and get some backlash
from people that are part of the porn industry.
A lot of backlash. I mean, even Jenna Jameson's
book, How To Make Love like a porn star,
I mean, which is a best seller. I mean,
if you read between the lines, she talks about
what really goes on. I mean, you know, she's
trying to sell porn on one and, and she's
come out and talked about that as, as have
many women afterwards. But um what's interesting is many
women in the porn industry. Once they're out, they
don't become public figures. And the reason for that
is first of all, they're scared of the porn
industry and what they'll do to them. And secondly,
they feel so exposed because their images are everywhere.
You know, you put an image up on porn
hub and it spreads across the porn sites. So
they feel like they've never left the porn industry
because your images are up there and you, where
are you gonna go? How are you gonna get
them taken down? And even if you do try
to get them taken down, they, they pop up
again somewhere else. So you're talking about a very
vulnerable group of women who um you know, are
scared that their kids are going to find it,
their kids friends, their next door neighbor, all of
that.
Yes. Something that I find really, I mean, unfortunate
to say the least, probably exploitative as well. Uh
And there's been reported by again. L Rhodes, Mia
Kalli and other people like that is that, um,
it seems that the content they produced or contributed
to is zoned by the foreign companies. And now,
even after they left the industry and they would
like for that content to be wiped off the
internet. Uh, THEY can't,
no, I mean, you, there's, there's ways you can
try but, I mean, very few have success, very
few and it's almost impossible given the way in
which they go viral and they end up on
different. I mean, you know, you often see is
when you sort of look at porn sites, the
same images across porn sites, everyone's pirating from everybody
else.
Yeah. And so what would you say are perhaps
some of the best solutions or potential solutions to
deal with these issues surrounding the porn industry?
Well regulation. It's the most, I would say it's
the um largest multibillion dollar a year above ground
industry that is completely deregulated. And so we need
to start thinking about regulation and they need to
follow work practices. I mean that if, if there
was had to follow the same work practices as
other companies that would close them down immediately because
of all the, again, the bodily fluids, the harms
done. Also, we need regulation to stop kids having
access to it and that's called age verification, which
has taken off in many countries and is also
taking off now in the United States where you
have to have a third party verify um that
that person is that anyone who wants to go
on a porn site is 18 or above and
porn industry is pushing back, of course, because any
regulation, you know, like all capitalist capitalist industries, they
fight regulation. No, no industry wants regulation. They fight
it, tooth and nail. And so the porn industry
has been fighting that and you know, when you
think they're fighting the fact that what we're saying
is that anyone under 18 shouldn't have access. You
just see how morally bankrupt they've become because before
pornography went on the internet and you had a
bricks and mortar shop, anyone under 18 wasn't allowed
in any way, you had to show ID to
get there. So all we're saying there is take
it back to how it used to be before
the internet took over the porn industry. Um, I
think class action suits of women who've been harmed
by the porn industry going after the pornographers because
in the United States where you have civil law
dis distant different to criminal law. Um, THAT would
ban if you kept coming at them with the
suits from parents whose kids had been harmed for
men who'd been harmed from women who'd been harmed
in it. Both, um, you know, through the sex
industry and what happened to them afterwards, you could
just slowly chip, you chip away quite heavily at
the profits and that's what this is about. The
porn industry is not there to make us have
more liberated sex lives. The porn industry is there
to make us to make money just like the
fast food industry isn't there to make sure we
improve our diet. And really porn is to, um,
pornography is to sex. What mcdonald's is to food.
It's the industrialization commodification of a real human desire
that he's taken away from you and sold back
at you and looks nothing like the original desire.
Uh Do you agree that uh another thing that
socially perhaps we should do is to not stigmatize
the wrong people that is do not stigmatize the
performers themselves because as happens with people that we
mentioned L Rhodes Mili and others, they are the
ones being stigmatized now. And even when they try
to look for other jobs, I mean, sometimes after
they've been in the porn industry, it's almost impossible
for them to have a normal life
afterwards that the women are stigmatized. Why the men
who make the porn and watch the porn are
basically anonymous. We barely know them and they're certainly
not stigmatized. So I would absolutely say it's crucial
that we understand who the victims are here and,
and these are women, these are a lot of
them are strong women to withstand what they withstand
in the I think I would not last a
day given what's done to them. So also to
understand that they need to organize now, I don't
use the term sex work because it's not work.
Right? It's sexual exploitation. And I think using the
term sex work is a real disservice to these
women because it denies the reality of their lives
and what's happening to them. So I would say
100% you do not stigmatize them. And I think
by using the word sex work, you are stigmatizing
them even more because you are denying their reality.
So, beyond regulation, would you be willing to consider
abolishing porn or do you not talk about that
much because you think it's not realistic?
I don't think the word abolish or censor really
fit in today's corn world about what we can
do about it. I think, as I said, legislation
regulation also what we need, we need really good
sex education in the schools. You know, uh, the
sex education taught in most countries is terrible. It,
they barely um, um, teach about sex and what
it's really like in relationships and they certainly don't
talk about pornography. And I think we need sex
education that builds resilience and resistance to kids and
they need to be trained teachers. And it's interesting
studies done on kids and they ask about sex
education. They all say it's out of touch with
the reality of their lives. Doesn't mention pornography, doesn't
mention what's happening to them. And a culture refrained.
We have, um, developed over a year using different
consultants as sex curriculum. That is porn. Critical is
free. Anyone can go on there just go to
culture reframed.org, go on to our courses. And you'll
see, we've got courses for parents and we've got
courses for, um, teachers and anyone else who wants
to teach sex education. And it's very robust. It's
been peer reviewed by people in the field and
I think it's the, one of the first ever,
um, robust sex education courses that brings in pornography
and it teaches critical literacy. That's what we do
not teach. When you think that most kids spend
their life on the internet, we should have courses
in digital literacy, how to unders and critical digital
literacy, not how to become better consumers, but how
to become more critical consumers of all the media
that you consume. I mean, the schools have dropped
the ball here totally on what it means to,
for a kid to grow up surrounded by pornography.
Yes. And the very unfortunate thing here is that
places countries or particular regions where, uh, sex education
is banned or something along those lines. I mean,
the places where Children and adults will get their
sex education from his pornography,
of course, where else? And it makes sense. You
know, they start getting sexually curious when, you know,
um, early adolescence puberty hits. Where are they going
to go when you've got this multibillion dollar industry
up there? So, um, the, the issue is not,
if your child sees pornography, it's Well, and so
you have to start early scaffolding education about what
critical literacy looks like. And then as they get
older, you bring in pornography to it so you
can do that. It's possible to be done. People
do it. It's, but it must not be the
only thing what you need is to have come
at this in every which way, the regulation, education,
awareness, all of these ways, you know, and to
be honest with you, it, we're so far behind
the porn industry in doing this, we are so
far behind because you get slapped with labels like
moralistic, religious um right wing. Um So we've got
to take this out of the realm of moor
and into the realm of harm. And that's where
we have the research that supports it and that's
where we have the academic approach to it and
also the feminist approach, of course.
OK. So let me just ask you one final
question. Do you think that there's something I mean,
apart from political approaches to all of these, that
there's something that individual people, consumers and so on
can do to try to combat some of the
more harmful effects of pornography,
consuming pornography. Stop, that's there's no way to do
this. You know, you cannot consume images of women
being you know, violated in that way and make
it easier. It's like asking can you give me
some more friendly images for racism that Racists like
to look at racist images. So is there any
way we can make better racist images? It's ridiculous.
You can't do it. So I would and for
the men as well, I would say for their
own sense of who they are, is this who
they wanna be masturbating? Jerking off to images of
sexual cruelty of women who've had few choices in
life? Is this who they really want to look
in the mirror and say this is who I
am because when I often ask that question, a
lot of them feel disgusted by themselves for using
those images. So no, there's no way that I
can make this easier by saying, go to this
place or go to that place. You have to
stop consuming it and become part of the battle
against the porn industry and the sex industry in
general. That's what we need. You know, basically, it's
left up to a bunch of impoverished feminists to
fight this and increasingly some other, some lawyers and
other groups. But you know, men need to join
this as well. This is not doing them any
favors, pornography and as they become fathers and have
Children, is this what they want their kids to
grow up on? Right. That would be my final
argument is to stop consuming it cause if you
don't consume it, they won't make it.
Uh And when it comes to resources, apart from
your book, which I mentioned in the introduction and
your nonprofit culture reframed. Uh Are there any other
resources online or elsewhere that uh that you would
like to mention?
Um There's not much to be honest with you.
There's organizations in the UK like CS is very
good. The Reward Foundation is good. Um Also, um
if you go on our site, we've got lists
of organizations you can go to, we've got resources.
We also have an academic library on the culture,
we frame site so you can read the studies.
Um So I would say go to our website
and you'll see the other resources and if you're
trying to get off pornography and once you stop,
there's also an organization called No FAP, which is
a support group for men trying and boys to
try and stop pornography. So yes, go on our
website and you'll find resources.
Great. So, Doctor Dines, thank you so much for
doing this. I will leave some links to all
of what you mentioned there in the description of
the interview and it's been a very informative conversation.
So thank you so much for doing this.
You're welcome. Thank you for having me on
hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in Nai
Zuk Mar Nevs called in Hofi Governor Mikel Stormer
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz J
and La Jung Y and the K Hes Mark
Smith J. Tom Hummel s friends, David Wilson Yasa,
dear Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter Romani Charlotte, Bli
Nico Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stass, Nale Me, Gary
G Alman Sam of Zaypj Bar J Price ha
in B do Fry Franka Cortes Solis Scott Zachary
ftw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki,
Georgio, Theophano Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams
Di A Costa Anton Erickson, Charles Murray, Alex Chao.
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Fist, Larry Dey, Junior,
Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert
Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas, Radis, Mark
Kemple Thomas Dvor, Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson,
Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi.
Perpendicular Jan Ner Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Luca Stuffin, Tom Veg and Bernard N
Cortes. Dixon Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian
Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.